# Programming III: Loops, conditional statements, and object-oriented programming


## Exercises

__Exercise 1:__ Explain, in your own words, the difference between a `for` loop and a `while` loop.  Write your response below in this Markdown cell.  

#### Loops:
**for** runs statement once, depending on the statement the *for* loop will run the statment for each item in the loop once

**while** runs statement as long the condition is true

__Exercise 2 (from your textbook, p. 49):__ 

> If you are given three sticks, you may or may not be able to arrange them in a triangle.
For example, if one of the sticks is 12 inches long and the other two are one inch long, it is clear that
you will not be able to get the short sticks to meet in the middle. For any three lengths, there is a
simple test to see if it is possible to form a triangle:
If any of the three lengths is greater than the sum of the other two, then you cannot
form a triangle. Otherwise, you can. (If the sum of two lengths equals the third, they
form what is called a “degenerate” triangle.)
> 
> Write a function named `is_triangle` that takes three integers as arguments, and that returns either `True` or `False` depending on whether you can or cannot form a triangle from sticks with the given lengths.  

For example: 

```python
is_triangle(2, 2, 11)

False

is_triangle(5, 5, 6)

True
```


```python
# Your answer goes below!

def is_triangle(int1, int2, int3):
    if (int1 | int2 | int3) > ((int1 + int2) & (int1 + int3) & (int3 + int2)):
        return False
    else:
        return True

is_triangle(5, 5, 6)
# True
    
    
#is_triangle(2, 2, 11)
# False
```




    True



__Exercise 3__: Sequences of numbers in Python can be generated by typing them out, as you've learned how to do in this class.  However, they can also be produced by the built-in `range` function, which can simplify things for you significantly if you need to generate a long list of integers.  `range` has three parameters: `start`, which is the first integer you want to start with; `stop`, which is the first integer you __don't__ want to include, and `step`, which optionally specifies the integer interval.  For example: 


```python
x = range(1, 21, 5)

x
```




    range(1, 21, 5)




```python
type(x)
```




    range



We've created a __range__ object which conforms to the arguments we supplied to the `range` function.  Notably, the range object can be looped through:


```python
for y in x:
    print(y)
```

    1
    6
    11
    16


If need be, your range object can also be converted to a list with the `list` function.  


```python
list(x)
```




    [1, 6, 11, 16]



Your job in Exercise 3 is to use the `range` function to print the following text to the screen: 

```
2!
4!
6!
8!
Who do we appreciate?
```

The printing of the numbers should be done in a loop over the numbers generated by the `range` function.  


```python
## Your code goes here!
nums = range(2, 9 ,2)

for numbers in nums:
    print(str(numbers) +"!")


print("Who do we appreciate?")
```

    2!
    4!
    6!
    8!
    Who do we appreciate?


__Exercise 4:__ Whenever you get new grades for your courses at TCU, your grade point average (GPA) needs to be updated accordingly.  GPA can be calculated rather simply; each grade is worth a given number of points, which are summed and divided by the total number of grades. Of course, it can get more complicated, taking into account things like credit hours - but we'll just keep it simple here.  

I'm not going to ask you to write your own class yet - classes and object-oriented programming are complicated, and you'll get used to it more throughout the semester.  However, I do want you to be able to interpret code written when you see it.  

Below, I've created a new class `Student`, that has some attributes and methods associated with it.  


```python
class Student:

    points = 36

    courses = 12

    def __init__(self):
        self.gpa = self.points / self.courses

    def new_grade(self, grade):
        self.courses = self.courses + 1
        if grade == "A":
            self.points = self.points + 4
        elif grade == "B":
            self.points = self.points + 3
        elif grade == "C":
            self.points = self.points + 2
        elif grade == "D":
            self.points = self.points + 1
        elif grade == "F":
            self.points = self.points + 0
        else:
            raise ValueError("Not a valid grade")

        self.gpa = self.points / self.courses


```

Read through the code carefully and try to understand what it does - and be sure to compare it to the previous discussion of classes in this notebook to assist you.  Run the above cell to define the class `Student`.  Then, respond to the following sub-questions.  

4a. Create a new instance of class `Student`, and name the student whatever you'd like.  What is the student's GPA?  You must use Python to show this in your notebook.  


```python
# Your code goes here!
John = Student()
John.gpa

```




    3



4b. Use the `new_grade` class method to give your Student instance three new grades: one A, one B, and one F.  What is the student's GPA now?  


```python
# Your code goes here!



John.new_grade("A")
print(John.gpa)
John.new_grade("B")
print(John.gpa)
John.new_grade("F") 
print(John.gpa)


   
```

    201/76
    204/77
    34/13


4c. Notice the `raise` statement that is associated with the `else` statement inside of the `new_grade` method.  What do you think this does?  Call the `new_grade` method so that the `ValueError` is raised.  Why did this happen?  


```python
# Your code goes here!
"""

The raise method is an exception that is raised and the code block does not run. 

ValueError was called due to the exception error from the character E. The method new_grade() only has conditional statemnts  for grades A, B, C, D, and F. 
ValueError: Not a valid grade



"""

John.new_grade(E)


```


    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    ValueError                                Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-4-9b711858db36> in <module>()
         11 """
         12 
    ---> 13 John.new_grade(E)
    

    <ipython-input-1-f01ba269a831> in new_grade(self, grade)
         21             self.points = self.points + Integer(0)
         22         else:
    ---> 23             raise ValueError("Not a valid grade")
         24 
         25         self.gpa = self.points / self.courses


    ValueError: Not a valid grade



```python

```
